[THEME MUSIC]
>>We're down 1.7% here, a
loss of 37 points or so.
Apple shares are just getting
hammered this morning.
>>We're down by between
3% and 4.5% generally
across these markets.
>>Let's talk about the speed
with which we are watching
this market deteriorate.
>>We're red everywhere,
essentially-- down by 4% or 5%.
>>We're down over 16%.
>>Dow, at the same time,
has fallen about 18%.
>>The stock market
is now down 21%.
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
guess what we're
going to talk about on
"Beyond Belief" today.
Whoa.
Our financial future.
My special guest, Chuck Coppes.
He's an investment adviser,
expert in securities
and precious metals.
Take a look.
>>It's the end of the US
economy as we know it,
and he feels fine.
Chuck Coppes, author of
"America's Financial Reckoning
Day," sees a perfect
economic storm brewing
and anticipates that
America will implode
into a third-world nation.
He has found clues not
only in modern economic and
geopolitical
conditions, but also
in ancient biblical prophesies.
But there is hope.
Chuck explains how to ride
out the coming economic storm.
Today on "Beyond Belief."
>>NOORY: And welcome
back to "Beyond Belief."
And Chuck also is
a noted author.
His book, "America's Financial
Reckoning Day," hit the charts.
I know when I had him
on "Coast to Coast,"
I had people calling me for
weeks after that, going,
"Help us.
Where can we get more on this
information and this book?"
People are really
interested, Chuck,
in their financial
future, aren't they?
>>CHUCK COPPES: Absolutely.
And it's a general
theme in my book
that we're on an
unsustainable path
to a fiscal and monetary
collapse, a crisis.
>>NOORY: Again.
>>COPPES: Well, it's
happened before in history.
And we're actually
in worse shape now,
but we can feel it coming.
We're facing a reckoning day,
and people just instinctively
can feel that something
bad is going to happen.
And a reckoning means
to settle accounts,
like an asset and liability.
Households have that.
And as a nation, we have
too many liabilities
and not enough assets.
And this is worldwide.
It's really suffering from
too much central planning
in the world-- central banking,
central planning, and mischief
that they create.
>>NOORY: Is it healthy to have
these bubbles occur every once
in a while and burst?
>>COPPES: Well, the
Fed has actually
created boom and bust cycles.
That's what they're noted for.
We should let the
corporations fail.
If you take the risk,
you should fail.
Banks should fail.
There shouldn't be this kind
of rescuing of the bank.
And I think
everybody feels that.
We're in a political season.
We're hearing a lot about that.
So that's really distorted
things and the marketplace.
So I think we're in worse
shape now than we were.
We never fixed anything.
>>NOORY: Well, in 2008,
we bailed out the banks.
We bailed out AIG,
the insurance company.
We bailed out General Motors.
We bailed out failed banks.
I don't think we have
the financial wherewithal
to do it this time, can we?
>>COPPES: Well, we've
run out of ammunition.
That's what the Bank of
International Settlements
has said, that we
don't have enough ammo.
We've had QE.
We've had TARP.
We've had all these
programs and bailouts.
And now we've added
actually more debt
to the Federal Reserve.
Instead of being the
lender of last resort,
it's now the buyer
of last resort.
$4.5 trillion dollars now
at the balance sheet there.
In fact, it's leveraged 80 to 1.
And that's big.
The banks in trouble in
2008 were like 30 to 1,
and they're even
in worse shape now.
And the risk is
more concentrated.
So we just keep kicking
the can down the road.
And money should have utility.
It should have value,
a store of value.
That's fundamentally
what my business is.
But this is a silver coin.
It's only $17, but
a gold coin here--
>>NOORY: Thanks, Chuck.
>>COPPES: OK.
[BOTH LAUGH]
You'd rather have
the gold, I'm sure.
>>NOORY: Oh, yeah.
>>COPPES: That's about 1,300.
>>NOORY: Nice little
piece of gold here.
>>COPPES: We like to say
that gold and silver is not
getting expensive.
The currency is getting cheaper.
Again, see, gold and silver
is the standard by which
currencies are measured.
And of course, there's
a battle to suppress
the price of precious metals.
That battle's
constantly going on.
I have a chart.
In fact, in my lectures
and in my book,
I start out with the
evolution of money--
how money has progressed.
And we could show that
here on the slide.
Money should be
a store of value.
We've gone from commodity
money, which should be durable,
visible, fungible.
And that's what
gold and silver is.
>>NOORY: It's heavy.
>>COPPES: Yeah.
That's three times heavier
than steel, gold is.
And it's scarce.
It's durable.
So it had all those qualities.
And it has intrinsic value,
where paper money doesn't.
Paper money cannot
be a store of value,
and it's always being devalued.
And then we've evolved
into fiduciary money,
about the 13th century, in
the banking centers in Vienna,
in Florence, and
later in Frankfurt,
where the goldsmiths would
warehouse this, people's gold
and silver.
And then they would
issue warehouse receipts.
>>NOORY: I'd rather
physically hold it.
Wouldn't you?
Rather than have
some other company--
>>COPPES: I stress that.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
But they wanted it for safety,
so the goldsmiths held it
for safekeeping.
And then they gave out
a warehouse receipt.
So it was called
fiduciary money.
>>NOORY: They were like the
vaults of the past, or what?
>>COPPES: They were the vaults.
Yeah.
This was the early banking.
This is the 13th century.
So you have-- they're
holding the gold and silver,
but they're writing
the warehouse receipts.
And people are using them
because they trust them.
That's what the word
fiduciary means-- to trust.
And it wasn't
shortly after that,
the bankers decided
90% of the people
are not coming in for
their gold and silver.
We could just issue more of
these warehouse receipts,
these notes out.
>>NOORY: On gold we
don't even own, right?
>>COPPES: That's called
fractional money.
Right.
So they keep a 10% reserve.
And that's essentially what
our banking system does today.
>>NOORY: Because if everybody,
if everybody went to the bank
to empty out their accounts,
the banks could not
come up with that kind of cash.
>>COPPES: No.
They're always
operating in insolvency
because they're always
suffering-- the fear is always
of a bank run.
So they want to prevent
that from happening.
So we've now evolved
to fiat currency,
and that's the final stage.
>>NOORY: Which means
there's nothing backing
the money, right?
>>COPPES: It means to make
a decree, a government
decree, a legal tender law.
So you see, real money doesn't
need legal tender laws.
You know that's money.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>COPPES: And they have
to force it on people.
And that's where we are today
with the Federal Reserve
System, which is producing,
like all central banks, paper
currency, and a flood of it.
And it's a very dark
history, where the Fed
came from 100 years ago.
>>NOORY: In 2008, they
talked about the banks
being too big to fail.
What does that mean?
>>COPPES: Well, probably--
there is 21 primary dealers
of the Federal Reserve.
They're counterparties, so
they buy and sell bonds there.
They didn't always have
that charter to do that.
So now they act
as counterparties
with the Fed-- JP Morgan,
Citigroup, Goldman Sachs.
80%, most of these,
are in the US.
Morgan Stanley.
And they're too big
to fail because they
have too many derivatives
positions-- things like that.
In fact, Eric Holder,
I think four years ago,
said we want to prosecute
these banks, but doing so
would disrupt the economy.
So we can't do that.
>>NOORY: So they them.
Get a fine.
Make some money.
>>COPPES: That's too big a jail.
So too big to fail.
And central banking
is very corrupt.
I mean, it was born in secrecy,
in Jekyll Island in 1910.
>>NOORY: By private
banking companies, right?
Cartels, basically.
>>COPPES: Well,
it became a cartel
because Paul Warburg was there.
His brother ran the
central bank in Germany.
And Nelson Aldrich headed
up this committee in 1908,
after the bank panic of 1907.
And some of that was contrived
on Wall Street because
of the market speculation,
the copper-- there
was some copper speculation.
But nothing the
weakness, the bankers
always wanted a
lender of last resort.
They wanted an elastic
economy, as they put it.
And they wanted to put the
losses on the taxpayer--
just what you said.
>>NOORY: Of course.
>>COPPES: Yeah.
Just what you said.
So it would never square with
this, our US Constitution--
a central bank.
We should have-- Article
1, Section 8 and 10,
we should have only
gold and silver
as legal tender--
every state, colonies.
And so now we have paper money.
So they had to run around that.
In fact, the Federal
Reserve would never
pass the supremacy test
today in the high court
because it wouldn't square
with our Constitution.
>>NOORY: Are all
countries in this kind
of shape, financial shape?
>>COPPES: Yeah, very much.
I mean, Japan has been
pursuing QE for 25 years,
the European Central Bank.
And central banking began in
1694, the Bank of England.
And so that's been
replicated everywhere.
And our founding
fathers knew this.
In 1775, Benjamin Franklin
said that the primary cause
for the revolution was to get
control of our own currency
and away from that debt.
They had run up their own
debt, being a British Empire.
Does this sound familiar?
Trying to be a global
policeman and empire.
The cost of empire
is taking us down.
And that's the risk
that we're running.
So central banking
was created in 1913
with the Federal Reserve Act.
Congressmen really don't
understand banking.
They were just passing it
three days before Christmas,
on a near-empty
congressional floor.
And they passed the
Federal Reserve Act.
>>NOORY: These people,
Chuck, aren't stupid.
I mean, they are
brilliant at what they
do to get to where they are.
Why can't they fix this?
They don't want to fix it.
>>COPPES: They don't
want to fix it.
And that's a good
question because they
are operating like a cartel.
There's about 4,000
member banks of the Fed.
Not all banks are members.
I would say the primary dealers
are more like a money trust.
And that's what
Charles Lindbergh
fought about 100 years ago--
the Money Trust hearings.
And they create now
the-- banks create debt
by purchasing bonds.
And the counterparties
sell treasury bonds,
and then we issue
money against it.
And so that's creating
money out of thin air.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
Exactly.
>>COPPES: Out of thin air.
And that creates a
multiplier effect.
It goes down into the banking
system, where the money gets
into the banking system.
If you show the multiplier
effect, you deposit $1,000,
you can now loan out $900.
And then they deposit.
Now you can loan out $810.
That keeps going, and that's
where you expand the money
supply by 10-- maybe 10-fold.
>>NOORY: Chuck,
Ayn Rand predicted
in her book, "Atlas Shrugged,"
that the financial system was
on the verge of collapse.
Let's take a quick look.
>>Money is the material
shape of the principle
that men who wish to deal with
one another must deal by trade
and give value for value.
Money is not the tool
of the moochers, who
claim your product by
tears, or of the looters,
who take it from you by force.
Money is made possible only
by the men who produce.
Is this what you consider evil?
When you accept money in
payment for your effort,
you do so only on the
conviction that you
will exchange it for the
product of the effort of others.
It is not the moochers
or the looters
who give value to money.
Not an ocean of tears nor
all the guns in the world
can transform those pieces
of paper in your wallet
into the bread you will
need to survive tomorrow.
Those pieces of paper,
which should have been gold,
are a token of honor.
>>NOORY: So, Chuck,
they're trying
to imply that money
is evil, and that we
need to go back to gold
and silver, and do that.
But that's not feasible.
>>COPPES: Well, truly, the
Bible says the love of money
is the root of all the evil.
That's why when you're
studying banking,
you're getting into some
dark history in that.
There's always enough money.
You just get the price right.
That's what Jim Rickards says.
He was recently on your show.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>COPPES: And you've just
got to get the price right.
It's undervalued.
Like I said, gold and silver
doesn't get expensive.
The currencies get cheaper.
And we've issued so much debt
that we need probably $10,000,
$20,000-an-ounce gold anyway.
But central banks
create inflation--
what I just told you there.
John Maynard Keynes said
that not one man in a million
can diagnose it.
It's very insidious.
Ron Paul's talked about
the inflation tax.
It's a hidden tax because
governments can only
tax, borrow, or print.
What do you think they favor?
The one that you don't
know, you don't understand.
And people--
>>NOORY: Or can't control.
>>COPPES: They think
an increase in prices
is inflation, when it's
an increase in the money
supply itself.
See, Keynes was an activist.
He believed that governments'
central bank should
be very active in promoting,
borrowing, and spending, when
the real way to
grow an economy is
through production and saving.
We don't have
production and saving.
We have a
consumer-based economy.
70% of our economy
is consumer spending.
And they just want inspire
that and inspire that.
And we're at levels below
1929, going back even to then.
So when you think about
where we are as a nation,
we have the Baby
Boomer generation,
which you and I are a member
of, a lot of our viewers.
And we are 80 million strong.
It's an extraordinary
demographic that's
coming through our society.
We've lived it, so we can
see the influence we have.
And the Baby Boomer peak
spending period is upon.
It's coming right now.
The peak spending years
of the Baby Boomers,
you're looking at the ages
of 30 to 55 years old.
And that's when you have
families, and kids in school,
and everything else.
And you're getting into
your peak earning years.
The risk we have with the
Baby Boomer generation
today is the
unfunded liabilities,
what's your $210
trillion, some estimates.
>>NOORY: And it's growing.
>>COPPES: $210 trillion.
That's beyond belief.
[CHUCKLES]
>>NOORY: Yeah.
That's why we named
the show that.
>>COPPES: And it is.
Trillions.
A trillion seconds
will take 30,000 years,
so it's just staggering.
And now we've reached peak
spending in this next slide.
The peak spending years
have occurred right
between 2000 and 2014.
The 2008 crisis could
not come at a worse time
because demographically, our
generation is now deleveraging,
and downsizing, and
things like that.
When Social Security
was found in 1935,
there was, like, 40
workers for every retiree.
Now it's about two.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
Those two are sustaining
the whole thing.
And it can't be done.
>>COPPES: That can't
be done either.
And so in 1937, they
actually were challenging it,
that the government shouldn't
be in the health care business--
Helvering v. Davis, which
I write about in the book.
And they said that the money
comes in is not earmarked.
It goes into the
general revenue.
So now we're back to
what central banking does
with your deposit.
It treats it as an
asset and a liability.
It's a dual claim
on the deposit.
>>NOORY: See, I get
the impression, Chuck,
that governments are
propping this up.
They're not telling
people the truth.
>>COPPES: No.
No.
>>NOORY: And they want to
sustain this for as long
as they can, but they're
not sure how long they can.
So at what point-- I
mean, in your title,
"America's Financial Reckoning
Day," that tells me that soon
we've got that day of reckoning.
We're going to have to face
this horrible situation.
>>COPPES: Well, Jim Rickards
is a gentleman I really like.
But he talks about
an avalanche--
that the debt in the world
is like an avalanche.
You don't know when the snow
is going to be on there,
and it's going to break.
And it's going to be some
rogue event, some default,
a thing like that.
>>NOORY: And then it just
snowballs all the way down.
>>COPPES: It snowballs down.
Yeah.
And it just collapses.
And it's a contagion because
there's no negative feedback
loop.
Who's going to
bail out who here?
I mean, you just
create a monster.
And Social Security
is what really
inspired me to write my book
because I'm a baby boomer.
And there's a study done
by Laurence Kotlikoff--
>>NOORY: You're
too young to have
Social Security, aren't you?
It hasn't kicked in
yet for you, has it?
>>COPPES: No.
I'm not even taking it yet.
I don't even know
if it will be there.
In fact, a poll said more
people believe in UFOs
than that Social
Security will be there.
>>NOORY: Oh, I believe that.
[BOTH CHUCKLE]
>>COPPES: So we're in
an unsustainable path.
I call it the third rail of
politics, which I write about,
because this seeing
this coming convinced me
that something bad is
really going to happen.
>>NOORY: Worse than 2008?
>>COPPES: Oh, yeah, because
they're going to just displace
whole generations of people.
>>NOORY: Chuck, I've had a
lot of people on my program--
not only on "Beyond Belief,"
but "Coast to Coast"--
all of them talking
about the same thing,
that there's going to be a
financial disaster ahead.
The problem is
nobody specifically
can tell me when that
"ahead" is going to be.
When is this going to happen?
Is it going to be six months?
A year?
10 years?
When does it happen?
Or does it just creep up
on us, and then it's done?
>>COPPES: Well, it's
like that avalanche.
The final amount of
debt, or contagion, risk
is in the system.
The movie "The Big Short,"
perhaps you've seen.
>>NOORY: Love that movie.
>>COPPES: Yeah.
I love it too.
It got Oscar awards.
And they knew that adjustable
rate mortgages were coming,
so they were shorting it.
And they made 500% profit,
Kyla Bass and others.
So I mean, they saw that.
I mean, here are these geniuses
on Wall Street-- said, oh, who
could have seen this coming?
And all the brokers were,
like, oh, Mrs. Jones, I'm
sorry about your account.
Goldman Sachs was actually
shorting their own stuff
too as they were selling it.
So I think there's some
people inside who see it,
and they're smart enough
to hedge themselves.
I'm one of those.
I'm trying to get people to
protect their wealth and--
>>NOORY: But you
can't give me a date.
>>COPPES: --get
out of harm's way.
Well, Bill Gross
is the bond King.
And he says he's scared as heck,
and he can't sleep at night.
What is he worried about?
We have a 35-year
credit cycle right now.
It started in 1980.
Interest rates were about 18%,
and [WHISTLES] all the way
down to 0, negative.
And you now have $88 trillion
of bonds, sovereign debt,
out there.
45% of that is US debt.
Look at the exposure that
the US has in this regard.
Nobody's going to
dump them all at once.
But Saudi Arabia has already
threatened to do that.
>>NOORY: Well, they're
already borrowing money
because the price of
oil being so cheap.
>>COPPES: Well, but they were
threatening to asymmetrical
warfare-- dump our bonds.
China has said this too.
So see, we're vulnerable
as a nation in that regard.
Now that would be a high risk.
I would say keep
your eye on Japan,
which just went negative rates.
[CHUCKLES]
>>NOORY: Which means if
you put $100 in the bank,
you'll take out,
like, $90, right?
Something like that.
>>COPPES: A year later.
So it's crazy.
So in Japan, they just want
negative interest rates.
And so they're
running out of safes
because everybody's running and
getting money, and putting it
in their homes.
That sounds like Gresham's law.
Bad money drives out good money,
meaning that bad government
money should force people into
the good money right here.
But that's negative rates.
That's how crazy
this has because.
The debt pyramid
in the world now,
the McKinsey Global Institute
says, is $200 trillion,
$60 trillion more
debt than 2008.
So now we're in worse
shape than ever.
We just papered over the crisis.
We're kicking the
can down the road.
>>NOORY: Would you feel secure
keeping money in a bank?
>>COPPES: No.
>>NOORY: At all?
Look at Cyprus.
Portugal just had this happen.
Puerto Rico, they're
downplaying this,
but they're going
to have bail-ins.
Bail-ins means where
you're made a Class A
stockholder, an
unsecured creditor,
for the risk of the bank.
Now this was written into the
Dodd-Frank Bill, Section 7-16,
that they will not put it on
the taxpayers to bail out these
too-big-to-fail banks.
So what we have is they're
going to put the losses
on the depositors.
Now I think in
Europe, for 20 months,
they've had this policy where
if you have more than $100,000,
they'll have negative rates
and that sort of thing.
But this, we've
never done anything--
this is uncharted water
for central banks.
They're making it up
as they go, frankly.
>>NOORY: That's dangerous.
>>COPPES: Well, they
can't service the debt.
And see, that's why we
have 0 interest rates.
David Stockman calls it
the monetary politburo,
that they just keep enforcing
this 85 months or 90
months of 0 interest rates.
And this is killing people--
investors, retirees, savers.
But they don't have any choice
because if they were to go
a 10-year treasury
bill, where 5% or 7%,
you'd be looking at a trillion
dollars' worth of servicing
that debt every year.
You can't do that.
>>NOORY: I spent nine years
with the United States Navy.
I'm pro military, and
I think a nation needs
to have a strong military.
That being said, that
costs a lot of money.
And there's technology,
there's manpower,
and you spend a lot of
money on the military.
There are a lot of
people in government
who say cut that out.
We're spending too much.
>>Mr. Speaker, we
are considering
a rule for a conference
report calling
for a $290.8 billion dollar
Defense Authorization.
On behalf of 5 million
children who are hungry,
on behalf of 9 million American
workers who are unemployed,
on behalf of 2 million
homeless Americans,
on behalf of school districts
all over this country which
lack the funds to provide
a decent education
for their kids, on behalf
of 80 million Americans
who either have no
health insurance
or are only partially
insured, I ask
that we reject this grossly
inflated military budget,
and use the savings
to reinvest in America
and to protect the
interests of our people.
>>NOORY: Oh, we recognized
him, good old Bernie Sanders.
That was more than 20 years
ago, talking about overspending
in the military.
But with what's going
on around this planet
these days, with
China, and North Korea,
and everybody else increasing
their military spending,
is that a wise
thing for us to do,
and that is cut our
military spending?
>>COPPES: Well, the
real question is,
can we afford to be the
global policeman as well?
We have essentially a
warfare-welfare state.
Eisenhower, in 1961 when he
had the Farewell Address,
said we need to be on guard
of the military industrial
complex, that it
will keep expanding,
and that has led to even
the militarization of law
enforcement and things
like we're seeing today.
But we kept perpetuating.
Japan went to a peacetime
economy and so on.
We spend more than the next 19
nations on our defense budget.
We have 10 aircraft carriers.
We're building two Ford-class
aircraft carriers at $5 billion
apiece.
There's only about 16 aircraft
carriers in the world.
So we really are an empire.
And one historian said
that empires don't last.
Nations do.
Should we be meddling
in other affairs,
and intervention, and so on?
Do we need 180 military
bases around the world?
Can we afford this?
Bernie's right.
He's often got
the-- he's targeting
the problem, the banking
cartels and the plutocracy that
runs the banking syndicate.
But he's got the
wrong solutions.
As Reagan said, government's
never the solution.
It's always the problem.
We'd do very well if we had
a much reduced government.
But this all started,
and was benefited by,
the Bretton Woods
Agreement in 1944.
You have to go back
in monetary history.
That was a monetary
reset in a way.
That was where, in
the post-war period,
other nations were
decimated-- Europe, of course.
And so we established
the US dollar
as the reserve
currency of the world.
This is the Bretton
Woods Agreement.
John Maynard Keynes hosted
it, and he's obviously
a collectivist.
So we gave a $35-per-ounce
gold standard to the dollar--
that foreigners could redeem
their dollars that we issue
for $35.
In the US, that couldn't be
done because Franklin Roosevelt
called in the gold in 1933.
So he decoupled the gold for
the American people in 1933.
And now Nixon, later, by
1971, so many foreigners
were demanding payment in
our loose fiscal spending.
>>NOORY: He took us off
that standard, didn't he?
>>COPPES: He took
us off the standard,
closed the gold window.
And that was a delivery
default on the gold.
That's what we're
even risking today,
with the record demands--
>>NOORY: Countries
like China and India
are buying gold like crazy.
Why?
>>COPPES: Well,
obviously, they're
very smart for doing that.
In China's case, they're
trying to, I think,
have a soft landing
for their economy.
But they're also trying
to have enough gold
to back not the Yuan currency,
but just to rebalance
the system as a
percentage of GDP.
I read a monthly newsletter,
I got into this last one,
because the SDR, the
special drawing rights,
were just adopted.
China was just allowed
that special drawing
rights of the International
Monetary Fund.
And in fact, Jim
Rickards says that they
have the only cleanest balance
sheet to rescue us from that.
In fact, another author that
I've read is Willem Middelkoop.
He's a Dutch author.
"The Big Reset."
He's talking about a monetary
reset in which he says,
will either be well
planned in advance
or hastily implemented on
the back of a dollar crisis.
>>NOORY: So that's a prediction
>>COPPES: I think that's-- yeah.
And I think that's-- they always
wait for a crisis because you
never want a good crisis to--
>>NOORY: So, Chuck,
the person at home,
the people listening
to this program,
watching this program, all
they want is to be comfortable.
They want to pay
their house payment.
They want their car or cars.
They want a nice,
little comfortable job.
And they want to pay their bills
and take care of their family.
That's all they want.
Are you telling me
that that's going
to be gone for these people?
>>COPPES: The more I look into
this-- especially in Japan,
for example.
They have a demographic,
the oldest population--
one of them-- in the world.
They don't have
enough birth rate.
So the demographics are
extremely tilted, and just
like it is here in the US.
So they're facing a possible
humanitarian crisis.
When governments can't deliver
and the checks can't come,
that's going to displace
a lot of people.
And I think our
government knows this.
I think they're anticipating
some of this unrest, uneasiness
that we see.
>>NOORY: So that
golden dream will be
shattered for a lot of people.
>>COPPES: It already is.
We have 100 million people
structurally unemployed.
We've outsourced our industry.
These are things Donald
Trump's talking about.
I'm not sure we can
make America great again
if-- these are the globalists.
They think in terms
of the global economy,
the secret trade agreements,
this kind of thing.
And they're not working in
favor of the middle class
or American families.
>>NOORY: Is the Federal
Reserve part of the problem?
>>COPPES: It's very much, yeah,
because it monetizes the debt.
It is our credit card.
We couldn't even go this far.
In Britain, when Nixon closed
the gold window in 1971,
they floated the currency
for a couple years
at the Smithsonian Institute.
It was very uneasy.
They created the G7.
And then the oil
shock came about 1973.
Some people might remember that.
It was a 400% increase in oil.
And there was lines, and
a lot of people thought,
I didn't know we
imported anything.
They didn't know.
And so they came up
with a genius idea,
with Henry Kissinger at the
Bilderberg meeting and others,
to create a
petrodollar recycling.
And that's in my third slide.
And I want people to see
that because it's a genius
way of exporting our inflation.
That's our main export.
There's too many
dollars in the world.
Currency reserves
back then were 90%.
They're about 60% now.
So we have all these
dollars offshore,
and we're not feeling
the effects of inflation
as dramatically as we would.
>>NOORY: Not yet.
>>COPPES: Well, if
it's all repatriated.
Or say, bonds are dumped on
us with coupon plus interest,
and things like that.
Paul Krugman says that we
owe our debt to ourselves
and we can just write it off.
No we don't.
We owe $6 trillion
to foreigners.
They'd be pretty angry.
We owe $6 trillion to
the inter-government debt
for Social Security, which
is broke, which is empty.
>>NOORY: Former
Congressman Ron Paul,
when he was a congressman,
wanted to abolish the Fed.
He got involved in a debate.
Let's take a look.
He doesn't say much.
>>I think to say that you
want to abolish the Fed just
because they've made
some bad decisions is
like throwing the baby
out with the bathwater.
I mean, President
Bush, God knows,
has made a terrible amount of
decisions over the past seven
years.
Do we want to abolish
the presidency?
No.
And I think that the reason
that we want to keep the Fed
is because over
the past 70 years,
we've had pretty good stability
in our financial system.
Prior to the
existence of the Fed,
in the late 1800s,
early 1900s, we
had bank runs after bank
runs, panics after panics
because we didn't have one
centralized system that
was ensuring the stability
of our financial markets.
And now we have the Fed, and
it's been pretty successful
for the past 70 years.
>>NOORY: It seems like
we're trapped, Chuck.
It seems like we're trapped
in a monetary system
that we just can't pull out of.
Am I right?
>>COPPES: Well, yeah.
It's really too much
central planning, too much
central planning on the
behalf of the central bank.
That's what Ron Paul
is really saying.
They create boom-bust
cycles, malinvestment.
And it happens all the time.
Look at the asset bubbles.
The stock market right
now is in an asset bubble.
And so we're running the
risk of central planners
meeting in private and
trying to run an economy.
This is what the old
Soviet Union did.
We need-- the US
Treasury Department
should be the fiscal agent
of the United States.
>>NOORY: Should be.
>>COPPES: Yeah.
It's too partisan, the Fed is.
Right now, they've
lowered rates just
in an election year because
they do it every time there's
an incumbent party.
So that's sending false
signals into the marketplace.
And in fact, traders are
all at their keyboards,
waiting eight times a
year when the FOMC is
going to make an announcement.
That's not a real economy.
Everybody's just
trading the Fed.
And as long as it's
easy money, then--
>>NOORY: Most people
think things are fine.
>>COPPES: No.
>>NOORY: That's the sad part.
>>COPPES: Well, they
don't hear bad things.
>>NOORY: It's their perception.
>>COPPES: They don't
want to hear bad news.
And their brokers tell them
to stay in for the long term,
things will come back,
we're in some kind
of an economic recovery.
Well, borrowing and spending
got us into this problem.
Borrowing and spending is
not going to get us out.
>>NOORY: We've got some
e-mails here for you, Chuck.
Mary from Long
Beach, California,
writes, "In your opinion, what
would be the most effective way
we could revamp our
monetary system?"
>>COPPES: Boy, that's
a good question.
That's really what this
gentleman has said--
Jim Rickards and
others-- that I study,
and that is that we do
need a monetary reset.
We need to write down
debts, sovereign debt.
>>NOORY: Can we do that?
>>COPPES: It's been
done before, sure.
>>NOORY: This is like
a voluntary bankruptcy?
>>COPPES: Well, It's
not done voluntarily,
but that's what
hyperinflation can lead to.
Then you have to
just start over.
Now again, it's going to
be either well planned
or it's going to go critical.
Now Robert Triffin was a
great economist in the '40s,
and he saw this coming.
It's called Triffin's dilemma.
And what he said in
1961 was the nation
that's issuing the reserve
currency of the world would
pursue loose fiscal policies,
exporting inflation,
and it would lead to a collapse.
>>NOORY: Do you think
they'd ever get to a point,
though, where they would
say, on such and such
a date, your mortgages, your
car payments, your credit card
debt, things you owe,
your student loans,
everything is forgiven.
We are starting clean, folks.
You can keep your things.
You don't have to give your
house back or your car,
but we have no debt anymore.
And then we start
all over again.
What would happen?
>>COPPES: We are in a period.
We've been in inflation
ever since there's
been a central bank.
I mean, the dollar's
worth only $0.03
what it used to be
100 years ago, see.
So maybe we need to just
go back to old pricing
and that sort of thing.
But it's very messy to do this.
It's all about a
confidence game.
Everything's built on
confidence and trust.
And as long as people
have confidence
in the system, when
they lose that trust,
then you have bank runs.
And then you have
these bad outcomes.
And China, I think, is losing--
>>NOORY: But you
don't think, though,
we could remove all
the debt for everybody?
>>COPPES: Well, if they destroy
all the digital records, who
is to know?
[BOTH CHUCKLE]
>>NOORY: Could we
start over like that?
>>COPPES: As far
as citizens, it's
a matter of monetary
policy and recalibrating
what the value is going to be.
Again, the standard,
and many believe,
that that's why gold has to be
a component of a new reserve
currency.
We've had the reserve
currency status.
They don't last forever.
And the IMF, I believe, is going
to propose a special drawing
right.
Right now, it is mostly 40% the
dollar and then euro, and 37%.
Then you have the yen,
the sterling, and then
China's just been included
this last year, in 2015.
They've always wanted
to be part of it,
but they've kept--
it's a Western club.
So they kept just--
>>NOORY: But they're
now in the club.
>>COPPES: Well, in
a smaller way, yeah.
But look at all the gold they're
getting as a percentage of GDP.
They might have 10,000 tons,
not the 1,600 they're saying.
They're the number
one producer of gold.
They could have 20--
>>NOORY: I don't think we
have what we say we have.
>>COPPES: I don't think
we have 8,000 tons.
Europe has 12,000.
>>NOORY: I think
Fort Knox is empty.
They tricked us.
>>COPPES: Well, it hasn't
been haunted lately.
Yeah, I wouldn't
trust that either.
So that's why we really
need a monetary reset.
And this would be for-- it's
a unit of account at the IMF.
And it's used for settlement
among nations and so on.
It wouldn't be a currency
that we'd be using.
Now they are issuing SDR bonds.
In every reserve currency, you
need a large liquid bond market
to absorb that, for currency
reserves and nations
in doing commerce.
I think that's likely
to happen, and I
think we could see
a recalibration
of the euro beating the dollar.
>>NOORY: Wow.
That's a big move.
>>COPPES: We're in
worse shape than Europe.
>>NOORY: That's a big hope.
Let's see what
Senator Ted Cruz has
to say about the gold standard.
>>It's interesting.
You look at on Wall Street,
the Fed is doing great.
It's driving up stock prices.
Wall Street's doing great.
Today, the top 1% earn a
higher share of our income
than any year since 1928.
But if you look at
working men and women,
if you look at a single
mom buying groceries,
she sees hamburger prices
have gone up nearly 40%.
She sees her cost of
electricity going up.
She sees her health
insurance going up.
And loose money is one
of the major problems.
We need sound money.
And I think the
Fed should get out
of the business of trying
to juice our economy,
and simply be focused on sound
money and monetary stability,
ideally tied to gold.
>>NOORY: I guess you
would agree with that.
>>COPPES: I tend
to agree with him.
I'm not sure we would have
a classic gold standard.
That's a little bit
different in the '20s,
and that led to the
depression and things.
And John Maynard
Keynes actually called
that the barbaric relic,
the classic gold exchange.
If we had a nominal gold
backing of currency,
it would surely help
bring stability.
And it would anchor the
temptation to inflate money,
see.
But that's the hidden--
that's what central banks do.
We have a debt-based economy.
Money is created
out of thin air.
To pay-- if you had just
$1 in the whole world,
but you owed 10%
interest on it, where
are you going to
get the interest?
So you have to create money
to pay the interest on top
of the-- yeah.
And this has created the--
it's a reckoning day.
It's postponing a reckoning day.
People always want to know,
when's it going to happen?
That sort of thing.
It's going to be a rogue event.
It'll be a Monday morning.
It will be a forex meltdown.
It will be a bond--
>>NOORY: We'll wake up in the
morning, and it'll happen.
>>COPPES: It'll be a
banking contagion right now.
You have $500 trillion
of derivatives.
These are credit-sensitive--
>>NOORY: Or credit swaps, right?
>>COPPES: Yeah.
Well, they're
credit derivatives.
And they're sensitive
to interest rates.
So we're trapped at the 0 bound.
We can't even raise the rates.
So that's why the
negative rates--
and to make that
even work, you'd
have to have a cashless society.
And the Bible says
someday there's
going to be a cashless
society, and you're
going to have a government--
>>NOORY: Will it be
an effect, though,
where we get worse, and worse,
and worse after that Monday
morning we wake up?
Or is it just going
to hit us one time
and then stabilize again?
>>COPPES: When you're dealing
with emotion in the markets,
then that's the main driver.
There's two emotions--
fear and greed.
And if fear takes over,
then it's a contagion.
If you have a Lehman event
and nobody can bail them out--
and you know what I'm saying--
so one thing leads to another,
we have counterparty
risk with all the banks,
and in Europe and so on.
Japan right now has had 25
years of quantitative easing.
They're buying 90%
of their own bonds,
40 percent of their ETFs,
equities, to stimulate growth.
This is crazy.
This is like on steroids.
>>NOORY: That is crazy.
>>COPPES: Yeah.
This is the bad ending.
Look at Zimbabwe, where they
had $500 trillion notes.
I mean, do we really want
to go down this path?
Hyperinflation is not
something that is a policy.
It's just something
they're forced into.
So then you get the deflation.
It's like Harry Dent
and others saying, well,
we're going into this
contraction, and deflation,
and deleveraging.
And I agree with that.
Even the demographics.
But that precedes
hyperinflation.
It's kind of like a tsunami.
It sucks all the water out,
and people aren't happy.
Then all of a sudden, you have
too much-- too much liquidity,
too much response from the bank.
This is what happened in Germany
in 1923, Yugoslavia, Zimbabwe.
There's a museum, I
think in New York.
It's about the history
of money that failed.
There's never been a fiat
currency that didn't fail.
Voltaire said that all
fiat currency goes back
to its intrinsic value of 0.
And this can never go
to 0-- gold and silver.
>>NOORY: Another e-mail in
from Jonathan in Massachusetts.
He said, what led up to
the 2008 financial crisis?
And as you've said, we're
in a worse shape today.
But what happened?
What caused people to collapse
in paying their mortgages
and things like that?
>>COPPES: Boy.
It all goes back to
one event-- 9/11.
Right?
When 9/11 hit, you had
the dot-com bubble.
And then you had 9/11 hit.
And suddenly, they
close the stock market.
And the response was
to go out and spend.
They lowered interest
rates, Greenspan
did, about 16 times
down to 0-- very low.
And it just created
an asset bubble.
Here's your boom-bust
cycle again.
>>NOORY: Did you see
this coming in 2008?
>>COPPES: Yeah,
I wrote about it.
The books-- actually, I was
doing research back then.
And Peter Schiff called this.
He called it accurately.
And I was seeing it come too.
Look, "The Big Short," they
saw the adjustable rates
coming in 2006 even, 2005.
I mean, we had weakness there.
And then, finally, it just
got too overleveraged.
And there's a lot of
blame to go around.
People were overstating
their income.
They were overrating,
triple A rating
the mortgage-backed securities.
Then they were selling them
and packaging them all.
And nobody wanted it to end.
Nobody wanted to be
the first to say, hey,
something's wrong here.
>>NOORY: They were riding high.
>>COPPES: Wall Street was
having a-- it was like a casino.
It was like an absolute Casino.
>>NOORY: How can
people track you?
Website, please.
>>COPPES: Yeah,
I would recommend
they go to my website,
idpconsultinggroup.com.
We can assist people there and
deliver your precious metals,
storage accounts, IRA accounts.
We do a lot in the IRAs.
You can roll over and transfer
these accounts for safety.
We like to put a lot of those
in silver, for obvious reasons.
It's undervalued,
and I think there's
going to be a break out.
I think China is
smartly doing this.
Central banks are buying
it as well, and so on.
But we can assist
people that way.
And we can do that.
We'd be glad to help.
>>NOORY: And the best
suggestion for people
right now would be what?
>>COPPES: Lower your
exposure to the bank.
Lower your exposure
to the equities.
Get into-- well, chapter
8 gets into a whole bunch
of our recommendations
there, and I even
have an investment triangle on
my website for cash and growth,
and those kinds of things.
>>NOORY: And just
be smart about it.
>>COPPES: I would have a core
position in precious metals,
absolutely.
And just be prepared to
ride through this storm
that we see coming.
>>NOORY: Well, I hope
the next time we talk,
you're not telling
me, I told you so.
But you never know.
>>COPPES: Well, I'm
just a messenger.
>>NOORY: That's right.
Don't kill the messenger.
>>COPPES: Don't
kill the messenger.
>>NOORY: Just take
care of yourself.
Plan accordingly because
it could be coming.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]